I am about to explain the simple three-step
process that you are gonna use based on research in
order to break the vicious cycle of procrastination and to
take back your time and your life. I mean, this
is big stuff, and I'm gonna warn you, like a
lot of things that I share, at first glance it
might sound kinda stupid. This one might even s-sound a
little smarmy, but this is all research-based, and in fact,
I have a copy of The 5 Second Rule book
right here with me. I'm on page one forty-five, which
is where chapter eleven begins, which is all about the
science of procrastination. Um, step number one
to breaking this cycle, when you catch yourself procrastinating,
forgive yourself. Step one,
the next time you catch yourself procrastinating, step one is
forgive yourself, and there's a really profound reason why.
Procrastination is not about laziness. It's not about a lack
of discipline. It's not something you do because you're dumb.
Procrastination is a coping mechanism. You just have a desire
to feel good right now, and you deserve that. You
have a desire to lessen the stress in your life,
and you deserve to lessen the stress in your life.
I get it. And this first step to forgive yourself,
this comes from research from Dr. Pikel. By the way,
he has been studying procrastination for two decades. I mean,
just imagine that. Studying procrastination for two dec-- That, that
is a dedicated person right there, and we thank you
for your service to all of us. His research found
that people who forgive themselves are less likely to procrastinate
again. In fact, there was a study that he did.
I wanna turn to the page. I got the book
right here. He co-authored a paper about how students who
forgave themselves for procrastinating were less likely to procrastinate on
their next test. It sounds silly, but part of the
problem that psychologists have uncovered is that when you're somebody
that procrastinates, you're really hard on yourselves to begin with.
In fact, being hard on yourself is one of the
major causes of why you're so damn stressed. And so
taking a moment and forgiving yourself, and you've gotta actually
have a talk with yourself where you are sitting there
like, "Oh my God, two hours just went by? Wow,
I must be really stressed out. I forgive myself for
just blowing off two hours on social media, and you
know what? I can spend the next hour setting my
day up tomorrow for success." Or maybe you see all
your bills and you realize you haven't opened those suckers
in two months. Just go, "Wow, I haven't opened my
bills in two months? I must be really nervous about
this. I forgive myself for not doing that, and you
know what I'm gonna do? I, I'm, I'm gonna just
do the best that I can. I'm gonna face this
head-on." Because the next step that you're gonna take, once
you forgive yourself, you gotta recognize that you're doing it.
Why? Because patterns and habits repeat unless you replace them.
And so noticing that it's a pattern, catching yourself, forgiving
yourself, that is a way we're gonna break this pattern
'cause the step two, based on research, you must identify
what you're stressed about. So let's go back to the
example of seeing bills piling up or, uh, getting the
second notification that you didn't pay that parking ticket 'cause
you procrastinated, and now you missed the deadline, and now
it's twice as expensive. Whoa, I really blew that off.
I forgive myself. What am I stressed about? I'm really
stressed about senior year of college ending. I'm really stressed
about this presentation that's coming up. I'm really stressed that
I'm behind on my sales quota. I'm really stressed that
my spouse and I haven't really talked for the last
couple days, and they're really mad at me. I'm really
stressed about getting these test results back from my dad.
I'm worried about him. When you identify what
you're actually stressed about, it loosens its grip on you.
It comes out of hiding. And see, I think that
stress backpack is an important analogy or metaphor that you
can visualize. It's behind you, so you're not, like, thinking
about it. When you identify what it is, you bring
it right in front of your face, and because you're
now identifying the source of the stress, it loosens its
grip. And now what you're gonna do is you're gonna
ask yourself, "Well, what would the future me wanna do
right now?" Vitti, the artist in you that has already
finished her portfolio, what does she want you to do
right now? You've forgiven yourself. You've acknowledged what's stressing you
out, which is the relentless pursuit of perfection. What does
the future you want you to do? Or Mel, you
know, you're zipping up your pants, and that breadbasket is
in there, and, you know, you forgive yourself for blowing
this off for so long, and you acknowledge the stress
that you feel because you are getting older, and this
makes you feel like you're not in control of what's
going on. What would the future Mel that had gone
to see the doctor and has got this in place,
what would she want you to do right now? And
so that's what you're gonna ask yourself. What does the
future you want you to do right now? And it
might just be the future you being the person that's
waking up tomorrow morning. If you're sitting on the couch,
two glasses of wine in, and you realize you've procrastinated
for the last five hours, and you've acknowledged it,
you've forgiven yourself for doing it, you've acknowledged the stress
that you feel 'cause, you know, you are in a
fight with a friend or a boyfriend or whatever, what
is the you that's gonna wake up tomorrow morning want
you to do right now? I'll tell you what that
you wants you to do. They want you to get
off the couch. They want you to pack lunch for
tomorrow. They want you to brush your teeth and turn
off the TV and the phone and read ten pages
of nonfiction and get a good night's sleep.That's what the
future you wants you to do. The future you does
not want you to slip back into that vicious cycle
and spend another three hours watching cat videos and memes
and TikTok videos, which we both know is exactly what
you would do if you didn't break the cycle by
forgiving yourself for doing it for three hours, acknowledging what
you're stressed about, and then deciding what the future you
wants you to do instead. And then finally, use the
five-second rule. Why? This is not just listening time, people.
This is doing time. We always say that about the
Mel Robbins Podcast. Use the five-second rule. It's one of
the most effective science-backed starting rituals on the planet for
creating a new habit or pattern, and all you're gonna
do is you're just gonna start. Because after you've forgiven
yourself and you've validated what's stressing you out and you've
tapped into the future you who is kicking ass and
taking names and needs you right now, I just want
you to start for one minute. So Vidhi, when you
sit down tomorrow morning and that self-doubt is there and
that procrastination kicks in, no problem. Use the steps and
then five, four, three, two, one, start drawing for one
minute. And here's what we know based on the research.
Once you make that first cold call, you're likely to
keep going. Once you start writing that first sentence on
this chapter, you're gonna keep writing. Once you hit record
on that video, on the video, you're gonna keep going.
Once you fill out the first name, last name line
on the application you need to fill out, you're gonna
keep going. Once you pull up your resume template and
you start writing, you're gonna keep going. Because the
problem isn't your ability to do what you need to
do. The problem is you've been trapped in this stress
and trauma and nervous system-triggered vicious procrastination cycle.
And look, I know this sounds like, really? Oh my
God. Mel, come on. I, I, I was listening to
this because I wanna be more productive. I wanna make
more money. I wanna get more shit done. I wanna
have more life bal- now you're telling me productivity is
about forgiving myself? It's about calling forth the future me?
Why would I want to try that? Well, let's
hear a word from our sponsors, and when we come
back, I will tell you why. YouTube, you enjoying this?
Great. We make these videos for you. You're watching the
Mel Robbins Podcast, and I wanna make sure you've subscribed
to YouTube, and I also wanna make sure please support
this show. If you're enjoying this, if you're loving this,
share these episodes. I know you got people in your
life that are struggling with this, so please share this
episode. Please subscribe to this channel. All of that helps
us grow, and that helps us continue to bring this
to you for zero cost, and you know I wanna
do that for you. Mwah. Back to the show. So
why would you wanna try that? Let me tell you
why. Because procrastination is a habit, and this
habit becomes a very vicious cycle, and that's exactly where
Vidhi is trapped. So let me let her tell you
what it feels like when you don't nip this in
the bud, when the vicious cycle of procrastinating on her
art and her work is now creeping into other areas
of your life. The worst part of all of this,
whatever this is, self-doubt or whatever, perf... wanting to be
perfect, whatever this is, the worst part is
that this doubt, this fear, is slowly seeping
into all areas of my life. I know this is
affecting all my, all the relationships in my life, and
I am just worried that this will take over and,
and destroy everything I love. So I think the
question is rather: how can I relearn to
believe in myself? How can I relearn
to believe that I deserve all the good things that
come my way, and that I am good enough? How
can I learn that? Vidhi, I love that. I love
that you reframed the question because that is what this
is about. See, I told you procrastination was not about
productivity, and I also told you that the thing that
triggers it was gonna surprise you, and that's why this
topic is so important. I say every day
that it is never too late to wake up and
be the person you want to be, and you deserve
that. And here's the truth on how you do that.
You have to act like you believe in yourself before
you believe in yourself. I'm gonna say that again. You
wanna learn how to stop doubting yourself? You wanna learn
how to believe in yourself again? You wanna learn how
to not be so afraid or full of doubt or
full of perfectionism, which by the way, is something you
learned in order to cope with crap that was going
on in childhood? Perfectionism, everybody, is what you
do in order to protect yourself from rejection. There's a
huge, huge connection between your desire to be perfect,
procrastinating, and the fear of rejection. And
so using these tools, you not only are gonna break
the pattern of procrastination, you have a roadmap for the
actions that take you to the future you, because again,
you have to act like you believe in yourself before
you do believe in yourself. So let me just make
this super, super detailed for you. Vidhi, when you wake
up tomorrow morning and you sit down in that chair
and you walk through these simple steps that I have
just taught you based on the research, when you start
drawing, you are acting like you believe in yourself, and
notice you started drawing before you did believe in yourself.
That's why this is so powerful.When you see yourself
acknowledging that you're procrastinating and labeling the stress and
forgiving yourself for getting triggered by it, and then five,
four, three, two, one, doing it anyway because you're
the kind of person that picks up the phone or
picks up the pen or walks out the door or
says that thing or does that thing, and you keep
doing that consistently, you know what's gonna happen? You're not
only going to get the results that you want, you're
gonna believe in yourself because you're gonna see yourself doing
the work to get the results that you want. It
begins with the action, and that's why I say the
Mel Robbins Podcast is not a listening podcast, it's a
doing podcast. It's in the doing that you become someone
new. You cannot wait to feel ready. You cannot wait
to feel motivated. You cannot wait for procrastination to disappear.
It doesn't work that way. You gotta act before you
feel ready. You gotta act like you believe before you
do, and that's why this topic is so important. It's
why I believe this will be probably one of our
most shared episodes because everybody struggles with this. Whether you
have kids in college or high school, share this episode
with them. If there's somebody that you wish would change,
this episode will be very eye-opening. If you have somebody
in your life, maybe it's you or maybe it's somebody
that you care deeply about that has huge potential and
you're like, "Why won't they just start doing that
thing? Why are they not writing their music? Why are
they not starting their channel? Why are they not applying
to nursing school? Why don't they believe in thems- why
don't they just do that thing?" I'll tell you why.
They're stuck in a vicious cycle, and now you understand
it. So send this episode to them so they can
understand it too and tell them it's a message from
their future. This is
a topic that I have a lot of experience with.
We're talking about none other than procrastination. The reason why
you struggle with procrastination is because you're thinking about procrastination
wrong. How am I feeling right now? What is truly
stressing me out? If you wanna stop procrastinating, you have
to understand-